Update of the Section 2, `High Energy Astrophysics Data` (#12)
ivoa/HighEnergyObsCoreExt: HighEnergyObsCoreExt.tex

\section{High Energy Astrophysics Data}

\gls{HE} data are typically considered to include observations obtained using X-ray, gamma-ray (from 100 MeV up to $\gtrsim$ PeV) cosmic-ray instruments, as well as astrophysical neutrino ($\gtrsim$ TeV) detectors. The domain is now sufficiently mature to provide open data that are science ready for open analysis tools ({\em e.g.\/} CIAO \citep{2006SPIE.6270E..1VF} or Gammapy \citep{gammapy:2023}). The domain is producing already many astrophysical results with high-level products such as images, including full-sky surveys for some missions, spectra and time series (so called light curves), fitted sky models with a spatial, spectral and/or temporal component(s) with their confidence intervals or confidence limits (permitting to derive extended source contours) and with their covariance matrix, as well as source catalogs with advanced, high-level data products such as aperture photometry probability densities, sensitivity maps, etc.

> Observations of the Universe at high energies are based on techniques that are radically different compared to the UV through radio domains. \gls{HE} observatories\footnote{One can cite Chandra, XMM-Newton, Fermi, H.E.S.S., MAGIC, VERITAS, HAWC, LHAASO, IceCube, Auger and soon CTAO and KM3NeT, SWGO} are generally designed to detect particles ({\em e.g.\/}, individual photons, cosmic-rays or neutrinos) with the ability to estimate multiple observables for those particles. These detection techniques rely all on `event counting'\footnote{By opposition of aperture photometry}, where an event has some probability of being due to the interaction of an astronomical particle with the detectors. The data corresponding to an event are first an instrumental signal, which is then calibrated, and processed to estimate physical quantities such as a time of arrival, coordinates on the sky, and an energy proxy associated with the event. Several other intermediate and qualifying characteristics can be associated with a detected event. The list of events detected over a given time interval is termed an event list in the \gls{HE} domain ({\bf event-list} in this document). Though an {\bf event-list} {\em may\/} include calibrated physical values, the data typically still have to be corrected for the photometric, spectral, spatial, and/or temporal responses of the telescope and detector combination to yield scientifically interpretable information. The mappings between the observables and physical measurements of the source properties are termed \gls{IRFs} that enable estimation of the latter ({\em e.g.\/}, the real flux of particles arriving at the instrument, the spectral distribution of the particle flux, and the temporal variability and morphology of the source) from the former. Some of the \glspl{IRF} are probabilistic in nature\footnote{The energy matrix is a probability density funtion}, and in addition may depend on the set of events selected for analysis by the end user. They are usually not invertible, so methods such as forward-folding fitting (using source models that are estimated) are needed to estimate physical properties given observables. Some missions split \glspl{IRF} into multiple separate data products. So, in order to expose \gls{HE} data into the \gls{VO}, some \gls{IVOA} standards should then be upgraded to deal with event lists with their mandatory complex \glspl{IRF} and with the very-high level \gls{HEA} products specific to the non-thermal astrophysics.

Reviewer: I reworded this a bit:
```suggestion
Observations of the Universe at high energies are based on techniques that are radically different compared to the UV through radio domains. \gls{HE} observatories\footnote{E.g. Chandra, XMM-Newton, Fermi, H.E.S.S., MAGIC, VERITAS, HAWC, LHAASO, IceCube, Auger and soon CTAO and KM3NeT, SWGO} are generally designed to detect particles (individual photons, cosmic-rays or neutrinos) with the ability to estimate multiple observables for those particles. The detection techniques all rely on \emph{event counting}\footnote{As opposed to aperture photometry}, where an event has some probability of being due to the interaction of an astronomical particle with the detectors, but also some probability from being from instrumental or background effects. 
The data corresponding to an event start with an instrumental signal, which is then calibrated and processed to estimate physical quantities such as a time of arrival, point-of-origin on the sky, and an energy proxy associated with the event. 
Other intermediate and qualifying characteristics may be associated with a detected event, depending on the detection technique. 
The ensemble of events detected over a given time interval and spatial field-of-view is referred to as an \emph{event list}.
 Though an  \textbf{event-list} \emph{may} include estimators for calibrated physical values, they typically still have to be corrected for the photometric, spectral, spatial, and/or temporal responses of the telescope and detector combination to yield scientifically interpretable information. The mappings between the observables and physical measurements of the source properties are called \gls{IRFs};  using techniques like forward-folding, they enable one to fit a model (with any combination of spectral, spatial, and temporal components) of the true flux of particles from a source arriving at the instrument to the measured quantities.  The IRF generally evolve over time with the instrument and observation characteristics, and are usually defined for a specific time interval and decomposed into a standard set of independent components, such as the spatial point-spread function or the energy-migration matrix, where each component may be stored or computed separately.   They are usually not invertible, so methods such as forward-folding fitting (using source models that are estimated) are needed to estimate physical properties given observables.   Since both \glspl{IRF} and \textbf{event-lists} are required to process \gls{HE} data, in order to expose it via the \gls{VO}, some \gls{IVOA} standards must be be modified .
```

* Is _event-counting_ really the opposite of _aperture photometry_ as implied in the footnote? I guess so, but it's confusing that we also do aperture photometry after having the photons usually. 
* I would suggest being a bit more rigourous with "IRFs": the IRF is the thing that maps true and measured quantiyies, and it is often decomposed into multiple "IRF components".  E.g. I would not say "some of the IRFs", but "some IRF components" (as this always depends on how they are decomposed).  There is only one IRF (though it may be measured over different time intervals), but inside it there are IRF components.

Reviewer 2: > Is event-counting really the opposite of aperture photometry as implied in the footnote? I guess so, but it's confusing that we also do aperture photometry after having the photons usually.

Event counting and aperture photometry are unrelated and certainly are not opposites.  Event-counting is about how the data are gathered, and aperture photometry is about how you interpret the data in terms of actual flux (which can be measured as counts, photons or other particles, or energy) passing through a defined aperture, normally considering and correcting for aperture losses and similar effects.

> I would suggest being a bit more rigourous with "IRFs": the IRF is the thing that maps true and measured quantiyies, and it is often decomposed into multiple "IRF components". E.g. I would not say "some of the IRFs", but "some IRF components" (as this always depends on how they are decomposed). There is only one IRF (though it may be measured over different time intervals), but inside it there are IRF components.

I would be careful here in that instrument response functions map from physical quantities to observables (and not vice versa). They are how the instrument responds to the physical stimuli.  For some instruments, the individual components (or some of them) may be separable whereas for other instruments that is not possible.  In some cases  one can invert the instrument response function fairly robustly to map from observables to physical quantities (but this inverse is not an "instrument response function") but in HEA Poisson statistics generally precludes this inversion.

As I have mentioned previously and in the note, I strongly recommend where possible we should avoid the term "IRF" because historically that term may have very different meanings depending on waveband and geography.

> In the following, the current ObsCore standard will be discussed in section \ref{sec:obscore}, focussing on attributes that need to be upgraded. Then, we propose the creation of a \gls{HEA} extension of ObsCore in section \ref{sec:obscoreext}, as some attributes are very specific on our domain. In these two sections, the discussion focusses on the attribute definitions rather on the attribute values. In the section \ref{sec:voc}, enhancement of vocabulary is proposed for some ObsCore attribute, DataLink sematics, UCDs and MIME-Type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, the current ObsCore standard will be discussed in Section \ref{sec:obscore}, focusing on attributes that need to be modified. Then, we propose the creation of a \gls{HEA} extension of ObsCore in Section \ref{sec:obscoreext}, as some attributes are very specific to our domain. In these two sections, the discussion focuses on the attribute definitions rather on the attribute values. In Section \ref{sec:voc}, enhancement of vocabulary is proposed for some ObsCore attributes, DataLink semantics, UCDs and MIME-types.
```
